

Who do you consider made the 'best' recordings of the Chopin etudes? - QuoraQuoraSign In Frederic Chopin (composer) Classical MusicWho do you consider made the "best" recordings of the Chopin etudes?UpdateCancelagdndC OpAKbkofyxb kimeMZoHpPnAxFdWaUrgydUvKk.qKqcqqozRmTjPWhat are the best productivity tools for entrepreneurs?One of the best productivity tools for entrepreneurs is monday.com. It's a powerful all-in-one solution that will mold to your business and grow with your needs.Those just start...(Continue Reading)You dismissed this ad.The feedback you provide will help us show you more relevant content in the future.UndoAnswer Wiki4 Answers Quora User, Amateur pianist and listener of piano musicAnswered Mar 5, 2018 * Author has 362 answers and 210.6k answer 

It's impossible to decide who interpreted them best, since musical interpretation is all so subjective. But I have to say that the most technically impressive recording of the etudes was made by Georges Cziffra. Nobody else could play quite like him. On the other hand, he was often flashy for the sake of being flashy and made some odd choices. If you want to hear the "old-school" approach with a lot of musical passion and don't mind a less sure technique, look for Alfred Cortot. And finally, for a more modern and conventional, but still very musical playing style, look into Murray Perahia.1k 

The answer to this question should boil down to, which pianist's style do you like the most. You could put twenty of the greatest pianists in the world in a room, and ask them your question, and you might get ten different answers. By the time a pianist has reached the highest standards of the art of piano performance, they are highly sought after. Perhaps you prefer a pianist with a technique able to handle the etudes who plays with a beautiful singing tone, or you may prefer a pianist with a probing mind who seeks undiscovered secrets, such as Artur Schnabel, or you might prefer a pianist...(more)Loading...The answer to this question should boil down to, which pianist's style do you like the most. You could put twenty of the greatest pianists in the world in a room, and ask them your question, and you might get ten different answers. By the time a pianist has reached the highest standards of the art of piano performance, they are highly sought after. Perhaps you prefer a pianist with a technique able to handle the etudes who plays with a beautiful singing tone, or you may prefer a pianist with a probing mind who seeks undiscovered secrets, such as Artur Schnabel, or you might prefer a pianist who plays with blinding virtuosity, such as Sergei Rachmaninoff, or you might prefer other specific specialized techniques. If I must recommend a single pianist, though, I will recommend Marc Andre Hamelin, who possesses all the aforementioned abilities.504 

Like others have said here, several good recordings of the Etudes like Perahia, Pollini etc are all excellent.Obviously, "best"is very subjective depends on who is doing the listening, but any recordings of the Etudes by any well-known/famous pianists is pretty much a good bet that they're well-performed and a safe choice to start out your listening.Some of the good ones I can think of are Perahia, Pollini, Lisiecki and my favorite, Chiu. Frederic Chiu is a relatively unknown pianist but his recording of both the Op. 12 and Op. 25 sets are truly amazing. They're by far my favorite out of al...(more)Loading...Like others have said here, several good recordings of the Etudes like Perahia, Pollini etc are all excellent.Obviously, "best"is very subjective depends on who is doing the listening, but any recordings of the Etudes by any well-known/famous pianists is pretty much a good bet that they're well-performed and a safe choice to start out your listening.Some of the good ones I can think of are Perahia, Pollini, Lisiecki and my favorite, Chiu. Frederic Chiu is a relatively unknown pianist but his recording of both the Op. 12 and Op. 25 sets are truly amazing. They're by far my favorite out of all the ones I've heard.631 